Introduction to SDL2 blog (#251)
conan-io/conan-io.github.io: _posts/2023-07-18-introduction-to-game-dev-with-sdl2.markdown

---
layout: post
comments: false
title: "Getting started to the SDL2 library for Game Development"

> description: "Making your first game in C and C++ can seem daunting at first. Thankfully SDL, Simple DirectMedia Layer 2.0, is a really easy way to get started. In this blog we'll introduce what SDL is, when you should consider it as your starting point and go into the code with a hands on example which you can follow along as we build a C application complete with image loading, text rendering and game controls."

Reviewer: I'm an oxford comma person, but in this specific case I think it makes the sentence more readable however you feel about it, no?

```suggestion
description: "Making your first game in C and C++ can seem daunting at first. Thankfully SDL, Simple DirectMedia Layer 2.0, is a really easy way to get started. In this blog we'll introduce what SDL is, when you should consider it as your starting point, and go into the code with a hands on example which you can follow along as we build a C application complete with image loading, text rendering and game controls."
```

---

> The best part of programming is creating something that others can enjoy. Which is probably why we all want to at least try and make a game, but learning a full-blown engine can be pretty daunting.

Reviewer: Just a comment more than a suggestion:
My gripe with this sentence is that you are saying "Making games is fun! But learning an engine is _hard_, so here, let's dive into a low-level library". I think that's even more daunting to most people!

But I like the catchy first 2 sentences that give the reader a reason to read it, so I'm happy keeping it this way and not chaning the wording either :)

Author: I changed up the follow paragraph let me know if that flows better :)

Reviewer: Perfect now :)

> There are a few low-level choices that make developing a graphical application more approachable, especially for C and C++ specifically. There's OpenGL and SDL. These are staples of places to start. However, this can be overwhelming because building these libraries from scratch can be a challenge in and of itself.

Author: ```suggestion
There are a choices that can make developing a graphical application more approachable, especially for C and C++ specifically. There's OpenGL and SDL, these will abstract the hardware but give us more freedom to write application code. These are staples for "Introduction to Game Dev Course". However, this can quickly become overwhelming as building these libraries from scratch can be a challenge in and of itself.
```

SDL2, or [Simple DirectMedia Layer 2.0](https://wiki.libsdl.org/SDL2/FrontPage), is a library designed to provide low-level access to audio, keyboard, mouse, joystick, and graphics hardware. It's cross-platform and mobile-friendly, so there are a lot of options and opportunities to dive deeper into different aspects of developing a game in C++.

> This how-to will walk you through setting up a basic app with keyboard controls, images, and text. That's a solid starting point to making a Snake or Pac-Man style game. For more advanced games, I'll leave some excellent references for you to continue with once you're set up!.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This how-to will walk you through setting up a basic app with keyboard controls, images, and text. That's a solid starting point to making a Snake or Pac-Man style game. For more advanced games, I'll leave some excellent references for you to continue with once you're set up!
```

> ### Bonus Material

Reviewer: I was expecting the 
>  I'll leave some excellent references for you to continue with once you're set up!

to be linked _last_, after everything has been explained

       ///
       /// Section 4: SDL ttf and rendering text
       ///

        // triggers the double buffers
        // for multiple rendering
        SDL_RenderPresent(rend);

        // calculates to 60 fps
        SDL_Delay(1000 / 60);
    }

    ///
    /// Section 3: Game Loop and Basic Controls
    ///

    ///
    /// Section 5: Freeing resources
    ///
```

We should have the basis for our game!

<!--![](https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/A4c4pbYZ9Ni860zBFj5x8uRD3O3ODrUwy6m1Bm67y_KYjuKJhkPsKqrjFEVbgkOlnkbThTMnulv0V_OkF04Ql9n6LhbLZYOpUihrAtwxJRkpdnhp0zQ84dv4DCc_3v6QSgyA3PuDUDJxueUjoJ39SzY)
-->

Try moving the cube around and watch it step around!

<iframe src="/assets/post_images/2023-07-18/conan-blog-sdl-intro-conan-2-cube-logo-moving-around.webm" width="775" height="480" allow="autoplay"></iframe>

## 4: Adding SDL_ttf and a font to display text in out game

Let's add the header `#include <SDL2/SDL_ttf.h>` to the top of our main code file.

Text is actually complicated! Each letter is a glyph, and each one needs to be rasterized into a texture so that we can add it to our render loop. We are going to make a helper function for this.

> SDL_ttf does a log of this and gives us both `RenderText` and `CreateTexture`, which, if you recall, is what we ultimately displayed with our cube.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SDL_ttf does a lot of this and gives us both `RenderText` and `CreateTexture`, which, if you recall, is what we ultimately displayed with our cube.
```

You can add the following helper above the `main` function:

```cpp
void render_text(
    SDL_Renderer *renderer,
    int x,
    int y,
    const char *text,
    TTF_Font *font,
    SDL_Rect *rect,
    SDL_Color *color
) {
    SDL_Surface *surface;
    SDL_Texture *texture;

    surface = TTF_RenderText_Solid(font, text, *color);
    texture = SDL_CreateTextureFromSurface(renderer, surface);
    rect->x = x;
    rect->y = y;
    rect->w = surface->w;
    rect->h = surface->h;
    SDL_FreeSurface(surface);
    SDL_RenderCopy(renderer, texture, NULL, rect);
    SDL_DestroyTexture(texture);
}
```

> Next up we need to load the font we want to use, for this demo I picked Robot, this will go outside of our game loop and this only needs to be called once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next up we need to load the font we want to use, for this demo I picked Roboto, this will go outside of our game loop and this only needs to be called once.
```

```cpp
    ///
    /// Section 4: SDL ttf and rendering text
    ///

    // Init TTF
    TTF_Init();
    TTF_Font *font = TTF_OpenFont("Roboto-Regular.ttf", 24);
    if (font == NULL) {
        printf("error initializing TTF: %s\n", TTF_GetError());
        return 1;
    }

    ///
    /// Section 3: Game Loop and Basic Controls
    ///
```

Now to call it during our game loop

```cpp
        ///
        /// Section 4: SDL ttf and rendering text
        ///

        // create a rectangle to update with the size of the rendered text
        SDL_Rect text_rect;

        // The color for the text we will be displaying
        SDL_Color white = {255, 255, 255, 0};

        // so we can have nice text, two lines one above the next
        render_text(rend, 10, 10, "Hello World!", font, &text_rect, &white);
        render_text(rend, 10, text_rect.y + text_rect.h, "Conan demo by JFrog", font, &text_rect, &white);

        // triggers the double buffers
        // for multiple rendering
```

> Just a note here, the helper function we wrong recreates the same texture on each interaction of the loop. This won't affect our example but if your game got complicated this could be quite inefficient.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just a note here, the helper function we wrote recreates the same texture on each iteration of the loop. This won't affect our example but if your game got complicated this could be quite inefficient.
```

    ///

    // close font handle
    TTF_CloseFont(font);

    // close TTF
    TTF_Quit();

    // destroy texture
    SDL_DestroyTexture(tex);

    // destroy renderer
    SDL_DestroyRenderer(rend);
```

## Installing SDL2 and setting up your project

The first step is to set up CMake to build our project. Following the [SDL CMake instructions](https://wiki.libsdl.org/SDL2/README/cmake#including-sdl-in-your-project), we will note that there are several CMake targets depending on whether we are using the static or shared options of the library.

```cmake
    cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.15)
    project(sdl-example CXX)

    find_package(SDL2 REQUIRED CONFIG)
    find_package(SDL2_image REQUIRED CONFIG)
    find_package(SDL2_ttf REQUIRED CONFIG)

    add_executable(sdl-example src/main.c)

    # Main SDL library for init
    target_link_libraries(${PROJECT_NAME} PRIVATE SDL2::SDL2main SDL2::SDL2-static)

    # SDL image to make a surface (aka what we'll render)
    target_link_libraries(${PROJECT_NAME} PRIVATE SDL2_image::SDL2_image-static)

    # SDL ttf so we can display hello world!
    target_link_libraries(${PROJECT_NAME} PRIVATE SDL2_ttf::SDL2_ttf)
```

> Now, we can use Conan, a C and C++ package manager, to install the libraries. It will not only install _SDL2_, but also all the necessary transitive dependencies. Conan fetches these packages from the default [ConanCenter](https://conan.io/center/) remote, which is the official repository for open-source Conan packages.

Reviewer: Do we need to say the "a C and C++ package manager" when the blog is ours?

Author: Yes, The audience for this blog may not know what it is and it just trying to learn about SDL so it's worth sneaking us in

> The reason to reach for Conan is because to build SDL locally but there’s a LOT of dependencies. Freetype, libjpeg, libwebp and libdeflate just to name a few. Different platforms and different options also need different dependencies, this is the HTML graph view for Windows MSVC 19.3, which using the conanfile.txt below, you can make with `conan graph info . --format=html > graph.html` to see what it looks like for any project!

Reviewer: (dependencies is countable)
```suggestion
The reason to reach for Conan is because while it's possible to build SDL locally, there’re a LOT of dependencies. Freetype, libjpeg, libwebp and libdeflate just to name a few. Different platforms and different options also need different dependencies, this is the HTML graph view for Windows MSVC 19.3, which using the conanfile.txt below, you can make with `conan graph info . --format=html > graph.html` to see what it looks like for any project!
```

![conan graph info HTML formatted view of the SDL2 dependencies](/assets/post_images/2023-07-18/conan-graph-info-for-sdl-on-windows.png)

To install the SDL libraries needed we can create a conanfile.txt that declares the dependencies for the project.

```ini
    [requires]
    sdl_image/[~2.0]
    sdl_ttf/[~2.0]

>     sdl/[~2.26] 

Reviewer 2: I think that maybe not everybody is familiar with version ranges, maybe it would be good to explain what this syntax does.

Reviewer 3: Yes, ``>=2.0 <3.0`` would be more explicit (and it is the recommended syntax for ConanCenter version ranges for this reason)

### Build and Run our Game

Now let’s build the project and run the application. If you have CMake>=3.23 installed, you can use CMake presets:

```sh
# Linux, macOS
cmake --preset conan-release
cmake --build --preset conan-release
cd build/Release
./sdl-example 
```

```sh
# Windows
cmake --preset conan-default
cmake --build --preset conan-release
cd build\Release
sdl-example.exe
```

Otherwise, you can add the necessary arguments for CMake:

```sh
# Linux, macOS
cmake . -G "Unix Makefiles" -DCMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE=build/Release/generators/conan_toolchain.cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release
cmake --build .
./sdl-example

# Windows. Assuming Visual Studio 17 2022 
# is your VS version and that it matches 
# your default profile
cmake . -G "Visual Studio 17 2022"
-DCMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE=./build/generators/conan_toolchain.cmake
cmake --build . --config Release
sdl-example.exe
```

## Conclusions

> 

Reviewer: I would go a bit further into the conclusions. Maybe have a recap of the things done, what the end result was/further steps you can now take?

    # SDL ttf so we can display hello world!
    target_link_libraries(${PROJECT_NAME} PRIVATE SDL2_ttf::SDL2_ttf)
```

Now, we can use Conan, a C and C++ package manager, to install the libraries. It will not only install _SDL2_, but also all the necessary transitive dependencies. Conan fetches these packages from the default [ConanCenter](https://conan.io/center/) remote, which is the official repository for open-source Conan packages.

The reason to reach for Conan is because while it's possible to build SDL locally, there’re a LOT of dependencies. Freetype, libjpeg, libwebp and libdeflate just to name a few. Different platforms and different options also need different dependencies, this is the HTML graph view for Windows MSVC 19.3, which using the conanfile.txt below, you can make with `conan graph info . --format=html > graph.html` to see what it looks like for any project!

![conan graph info HTML formatted view of the SDL2 dependencies](/assets/post_images/2023-07-18/conan-graph-info-for-sdl-on-windows.png)

To install the SDL libraries needed we can create a conanfile.txt that declares the dependencies for the project.

```ini

>     [requires]
>     sdl_image/[~2.0]
>     sdl_ttf/[~2.0]
>     sdl/[~2.26] 
> 
>     [generators]
>     CMakeToolchain
>     CMakeDeps
> 
>     [layout]
>     cmake_layout

Author: ```suggestion
[requires]
sdl_image/[~2.0]
sdl_ttf/[~2.0]
sdl/[~2.26] 

[generators]
CMakeToolchain
CMakeDeps

[layout]
cmake_layout
```
